Mozilla ad attribution blog (#449)
readthedocs/ethicalads.io: content/posts/2024-mozilla-private-ad-attribution.md

Back in June,
[Mozilla acquired](https://blog.mozilla.org/en/mozilla/mozilla-anonym-raising-the-bar-for-privacy-preserving-digital-advertising/)
privacy-centric ad measurement company [Anonym](https://www.anonymco.com/)
which was founded a few years back by some senior Meta staff.
Then last week, Mozilla unveiled plans for testing
[privacy preserving attribution](https://blog.mozilla.org/netpolicy/2024/08/22/ppa-update/).
Judging from the [HackerNews sentiment](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=41311479),
it was not well received.

Clearly we operate an ad network so our opinions are biased.
We firmly believe that advertising can be effective without invasive tracking
and we built a profitable business around it.
In this post I'm going to dive deeper into ad attribution,
what Mozilla is actually doing
and what it means for privacy and advertising more generally.

## What is ad attribution and how does it work?

> Ad attribution is just measuring the effectiveness of marketing channels

Reviewer: For some reason, `just` made this sentence take a second for me to parse.

```suggestion
Ad attribution is simply the measuring the effectiveness of marketing channels
```

Or `a method of measuring`, etc.

To give a concrete example, if a person clicks an ad on Facebook that points to an ecommerce site,
the ecommerce site will usually have a Facebook pixel on their product pages, shopping cart pages and checkout page.
Facebook can then see how the ad click performed,
which items were [added to their cart](https://www.facebook.com/business/help/256019281275126/),
and if a [purchase was made](https://www.facebook.com/business/help/339239069606476).
This data can then feed into an ad optimization loop within Facebook.
Facebook will then offer to "optimize the ad campaign for conversions".
At EthicalAds, we have taken a hard stand against these kinds of ad pixels that track people across the web.

A lot of privacy conscious users aren't too keen on being tracked across sites they browse
and that has led to a number of efforts to try to do ad attribution
without compromising user privacy.
Google Chrome's [now scrapped](https://privacysandbox.com/news/privacy-sandbox-update/)
plans to [kill third-party cookies]({filename}../posts/2021-post-cookie-ad-landscape.md)
were supposed to herald the end of some of the worst kinds of attribution
as well as some forms of invasive ad targeting.

> However, it looks like those will be sticking around for a while longer.

Reviewer: This felt a little ominous maybe, and I was expecting it was to be clarified below more. I know now this is covered in the article above but maybe expand on this here too, assuming readers won't read the article above? Ie:

```
However, with Google reversing their decision, these attribution methods will continue to be prevalent for a while longer.
```

that could be used for more granular tracking of individual users
although far less than would be possible with a cookie.

A major reason for the Privacy Sandbox features, however, was that Chrome was deprecating and removing
third-party cookies (as Safari and Firefox did) and that has been put on hold indefinitely.
As a result, it's unclear what will happen with Google's Attribution Reporting.

Like PCM, we've never had an advertiser ask about this type of attribution reporting from Google
although we get requests (and respectfully decline) for Google ad pixels
which are the non-privacy friendly way of doing ad measurement and attribution.

### Ad Confirmations (Brave)

[Brave Browser](https://brave.com/) blocks many analytics tools like Google Analytics
that helps advertisers report on their campaigns.
Many of those same tools can be used to track users across the web.
However, Brave also sells advertising and so they have built some [ad reporting](https://ads-help.brave.com/campaign-performance/reporting/)
directly into their browser.

When a user clicks on an ad in Brave,
the Brave Browser watches if that user later visits a page that represents a conversion for that ad.

> This allows Brave to report that conversion back in their ad reporting tools.

Reviewer: This section was the only part that didn't feel tied in at the end, so it feels a little dangling still. It is pretty obvious to mention Brave, given their history with advertising focus though.

I think this stood out because the other sections on Apple/Google's approach mentioned that the approaches didn't work, some anecdotal proof of adoption, etc

So maybe there is more to say here -- deficiencies of their approach or why it hasn't been adopted, or that no advertisers have been interested here, or even just comparison in approaches to Apple/Google/etc.

Author: Ya. There's not as much information on exactly how it's implemented. I found a few details but it seemed mixed with how they're paying individuals for the ads Brave puts via their crypto token. I'll see if I can dig a bit deeper.

Reviewer: Hah yeah, that alone might be the mention here even. It's likely the crypto token pattern is going to shadow anything they are doing technically for attribution.

Author: I added some more details on Brave with a link to their Ad Confirmations wiki.

<blockquote class="blockquote mb-2">
  <p class="mb-2">
    “Commercial involvement in the development of the internet brings many benefits; a balance between commercial profit and public benefit is critical.”
  </p>
  <p class="small">- <a href="https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/manifesto/#principles-09">The Mozilla Manifesto</a></p>
</blockquote>

Based on what [Mozilla has said publicly](https://blog.mozilla.org/en/mozilla/mozilla-anonym-raising-the-bar-for-privacy-preserving-digital-advertising/)
about Privacy-Preserving Attribution (PPA),
their approach has a number of similarities to Apple's and Google's
but there's a few differences.
Also, although Meta isn't mentioned in their blog post,
Meta collaborated with Mozilla on their approach.

Like Apple's and Google's approach, Mozilla plans to have a method
for the browser itself to record ad impressions and conversions.
As in Apple's approach, they intend to pass data through an anonymous proxy
in order to make sure the relevant parties don't pass around users' IP addresses.

One big difference is that Mozilla is turning on PPA by default in Firefox.

> This was one of the big points of contention among the developer crowd on HackerNews.

Reviewer: I saw plenty of mentions of this outside HN too. This could be broader, like mentioning multiple sites or really broad as something like `developer and privacy communities` or anything along those lines.

> This was one of the big points of contention among the developer crowd on HackerNews.

Author: ```suggestion
This was one of the big points of contention among the developer and privacy communities.
```

Another big difference is the level of complexity of the proposal.
Apple's PCM implementation is actually pretty simple and attempts to keep data safe by collecting relatively little of it.
Google's proposal is also relatively straight-forward although, as I mentioned, weaker on privacy.
By contrast, Mozilla's proposal seems a lot more complex.

PPA involves dividing up attribution data into pieces,
adding sufficient statistical noise to ensure privacy,
encrypting the pieces,
sending the parts up to different parties,
and then restricting the types of aggregation reports
possible that combine the two parts.
We'll have to see how their test on MDN goes
and see if we can verify some of these claims.

<div class="postimage text-center">
  <img class="w-75" src="{static}../images/posts/2024-mozilla-ad-attribution.png" alt="Mozilla's proposal for ad attribution">
  <p class="w-75 m-auto"><small>From Mozilla's <a rel="noopener noreferrer nofollow" href="https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QMHkAQ4JiuJkNcyGjAkOikPKNXAzNbQKILqgvSNIAKw/edit">Outline of a private attribution measurement API</a></small></p>
</div>

## Conclusion

> So far, there's been pretty wide agreement that some methods of ad attribution
> are more invasive than others and bad for users' privacy.

Reviewer: This felt missing:

```suggestion
So far, there's been pretty wide agreement that some methods of ad attribution
are more invasive than others and are bad for users' privacy.
```

Reviewer: Unless you were going more for:

```suggestion
So far, there's been pretty wide agreement that some methods of ad attribution
are more invasive than others and some are even bad for users' privacy.
```

Title: Mozilla's privacy preserving ad attribution: The future or an oxymoron?

> Date: August 28, 2024

Author: ```suggestion
Date: August 29, 2024
```
